Her Excellency, Her Royal Majesty, the Queen of Hearts!
And the King.
Who's been painting my roses red?
Now, let me see, my dear.
It certainly isn't a heart.
Why?
It's a little girl.
Yes, and I was hoping... Look up.
Speak nicely.
And don't twigle your fingers.
Turn out your toes.
You can't see.
Open your mouth a little wider.
And always say, yes, your majesty.
Yes, your majesty.
Well, when Lewis Carroll wrote Alice in Wonderland, he certainly depicted the Queen of Hearts in the most unflattering terms, and Walt Disney, of course, picked up on that.
But throughout history, kings and queens have often distinguished themselves because of their eccentric and sometimes even violent behavior.
The Roman emperor, Caligula,
not only declared himself to be a god with all the rights and privileges of such, even his horse, Incitatatus, got royal treatment.
He lived in a marble stall, and he had an ivory feeding trough, and he was actually appointed as one of Caligula's consuls, a chief magistrate for the horse.
King Charles VI of France, known as the crazy king of France,
He would have these psychotic episodes and during one of those, he came to the conclusion that he was made of glass.
And because of that, he insisted that iron rods had to be sewn into all of his clothing to protect his royal crystalness.
Certainly, Herod the Great would belong to that royal hall of shame.
Much like the Queen of Hearts, his many cruelties
came to define his reign.
And if you want to read up on Herod the Great, it is a dark history to be sure.
The Jewish historian Josephus records that Herod was a powerful ruler, but also one who became increasingly mentally unstable, and along with that, paranoid, and along with that, cruel.
That is a bad combination in a king.
For instance, he passionately loved his second wife, a woman named Miriam.
She was a Jewish, Hasmonean princess, and it had a couple benefits from one, he loved her, but also because of her, it gave him a lot of political benefit to cement his power with the Jewish people because that was who he was ruling over at the time.
Unfortunately for him, Miriam hated him.
It might have something to do with the fact that he had killed all of her family.
That can cause a little tension in the family.
But in Herod's eyes, all of those executions had been necessary, because he saw the Hasmonean dynasty as a threat to his own reign.
And ultimately, it was in a fit of jealousy that Herod ended up killing Mariam as well.
Loved her dearly, but he couldn't have her cheating.
And it appears she wasn't, but he killed her anyway.
Before she died, she gave Herod two sons, Alexander and Aristobulus.
And at one level, he loved them as his sons, but he also feared them.
Because again, they might pose a threat to his rule.
And so Josephus records that Herod made this very elaborate show of reconciling with his sons, right after the death of their mother.
And again, that would obviously cause some family tension.
He made a big show of reconciling with his sons and loving them and bringing them back in.
And yet, all the while, Josephus records that he was plotting for how to get rid of them.
And eventually, opportunity knocked and Herod had both of them put to death.
So he killed his wife.
He killed both of his sons.
And that led Caesar Augustus to quip.
It is better to be Herod's pig than his son.
Ouch.
Not surprisingly, Herod came to be hated by the people that he ruled.
And as his health began to fail, and he realized that death was drawing near in a final, cruel bid for respect, Herod had leading men from every town in his domain arrested, brought to the hippodrome in Jericho, and kept their under guard.
And the standing orders were that all of them were to be executed upon his death.
The reason being, Herod wanted to be sure that there would be mourning when he died.
No one's gonna mourn him if it was just him that died.
Fortunately, cooler heads prevailed and that order was never carried out.
Now, I give you this backstory on Herod because I think it gives context to a rather bizarre story of cruelty
that accompanies the visit of the Magi.
This advent season we are taking time to consider the star, consider the Magi who came looking for this newborn king.
And I want to take you back to Matthew chapter two and read some selected passages starting at verse one and then working our way down through verse 16.
Now after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king,
Behold, wise men from the east came to Jerusalem saying, where is he who has been born king of the Jews?
For we saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him.
When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled.
And all Jerusalem with him, and assembling all of the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of them where the Christ was to be born.
They told him, in Bethlehem of Judea, for so it is written by the prophet.
Then Herod summoned the wise men secretly and ascertained from them what time the star had appeared.
And he sent them to Bethlehem saying, Go and search diligently for the child, and when you have found him, bring me word that I too may come and worship him.
After listening to the king, they went on their way and behold the star that they had seen when it rose, went before them until it came to rest over the place where the child was.
And going into the house, they saw the child with Mary his mother, and they fell down and worshiped him.
And being warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed to their own country by another way.
Then Herod, when he saw that he had been tricked by the wise men, became furious.
And he sent and killed all the male children in Bethlehem, and in all that region who were two years old and under,
according to the time that he had ascertained from the wise men.
When we talked last week a bit about the amazing celestial event that had brought the Magi from far away to Jerusalem in search of a newly born king, we thought about what was this event all about.
And our Christmas cards usually depict
three solitary figures writing on camels across a barren landscape.
That's how we all visualize this.
Even our graphic, we've got the three wise men up there.
But the truth of the matter is that it was more likely a caravan of some size in inner Jerusalem.
We really don't know how many Magi there were.
The reason people have said three was because when Matthew lists the gifts that were brought, he lists three gifts, gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
But that says nothing about how many of these magi were actually traveling together.
Because of their social status, I talked about this a bit last week, they were the philosophers, the scientists, the magicians, they were men of renown in Babylonian culture.
Because of that, they would doubtless have been accompanied by quite an entourage.
They would have had servants, there would have been soldiers to protect them as they traveled, might have been some apprentices in training.
So this was quite an entourage that came to Jerusalem, and you can just imagine the guards atop the wall of Jerusalem looking out, seeing this procession coming would have sounded the alarm that a caravan was approaching.
There might have been advanced messengers that came from the wise men to the city to let them know why this procession was coming, or maybe the king sent soldiers out to meet them to find out if they were friend or foe.
Whatever happened, you can be sure that the gossip and the curiosity within Jerusalem would have been in full swing before that procession ever entered the city.
This was an event when these guys showed up.
And certainly as they made their way through the narrow streets toward the Palace of Herod, all eyes would have been drawn to these mysterious foreign dignitaries that were visiting Jerusalem.
So what were these people here for?
Matthew gives us an abbreviated version of the explanation they gave to Herod.
As learned men who studied the heavens, as well as men who knew the wisdom literature of the day, they concluded that a new Jewish king had been born.
And they've come to pay homage to him.
And they want to know where might they find his cradle.
Maybe they anticipated that Herod would greet that news with smiles.
that he would walk them into the palace.
And maybe he would lead them down some ornate hallways and finally show them into the royal nursery where they could meet this new heir apparent to the throne.
But so far as Herod knew, there was no new heir.
And for an egocentric paranoid tyrant like Herod, that kind of news was deeply troubling.
I had an old boss who used to say that anything with more than one head belongs in a zoo.
And in other words, you can only have one boss on a job.
And Herod certainly ascribed to that philosophy.
As far as he was concerned, there can only be one king in the kingdom.
And to have people tell them there might be another king that's been born, well that was one king too many.
Somebody had to go.
And of course the angst went beyond the palace walls.
Herod's proclivity to violence
was well known.
I've just given you some of the history.
So you understand the people that lived around Herod were always a bit on a hair trigger as to what this guy might do.
Because if Herod ain't happy, ain't nobody happy.
Or as Matthew more delicately puts it, he was troubled and all Jerusalem with him.
But Herod was also cunning.
And so for the time being, he kept his paranoia to himself.
The news that Herod gleaned from his own wise men is that there is an ancient prophecy by Micah about a coming king.
And like the prophecy of Balaam that I mentioned last week, this prophecy by Micah is probably one that the Persian foreigners were acquainted with as well.
And according to that prophecy, the Messianic king was to be born in Bethlehem.
That's about five and a half miles from Jerusalem.
Now initially, Herod's response seems commendable, right?
You know the story.
Herod summoned the wise men secretly and ascertained from them what time the star had appeared.
And he sent them to Bethlehem saying, go and search diligently for the child.
And when you found him, bring me word that I too may come and worship him.
How kind.
How thoughtful.
Of course, that secretive meeting, that should have been a red flag right there, shouldn't it?
I mean, everybody knew that these foreign guests were on a mission, so why meet in secret?
Well, one thing that Herod didn't want was he did not want a mass exodus out of Jerusalem of Jews with messianic stars in their eyes rushing to Bethlehem to meet this new king.
Of course, Hera is also setting the stage for something more sinister because it's a lot easier to eliminate the competition if nobody knows or is even looking where he is.
So why did he care about when the star had first appeared?
I think he was calculating in his own mind just how much of a strategic threat this new king might be.
See, if the wise men had told him, well, we first saw this 16 or 18 years ago, he would have been thinking, okay, I've got a problem.
Whoever this guy is, he's been around long enough.
He might have spies.
He might be putting together the coup right now.
There might be spies in my own court.
When he finds out that it's only been two years, that was probably a relief.
This is still somebody that probably doesn't have any influence.
They're not really a threat yet.
So if he knows where to send these guys, if he knows where to send his soldiers to find this baby, it's only gonna take one quick sword thrust and this problem will just go away.
Of course, Herod didn't frame his request to the Magi in quite those kind of mobster terms, did he?
What Herod said was that his intense curiosity was all rooted in his own desire to come and give his own homage
to this new Jewish king.
The late George Burns once quipped, said, acting is all about honesty.
If you can fake that, you've got it made.
Well, Herod was a good, honest actor.
Now, gratefully, Herod's plot was thwarted because the God who knows all things intervened.
The Magi, men deeply attuned to the mystical, were warned in a dream not to return to Herod.
Joseph himself, if you read the story, was warned to flee from Bethlehem.
But sadly, while Herod's goal was thwarted, you know the story.
His cruelty still played itself out.
Lacking the specifics that he had hoped the magi would give him, he was looking to know who the mark was, he would know where to put the hit, not knowing that,
He chose a wholesale approach and he ordered that all of the male children in Bethlehem under the age of two should be put to death.
Alfred Edersheim in his classic work on the life of Christ suggests that given the small size of Bethlehem, it was a little village that the killing was probably less than 20 children.
Now that doesn't make it better.
It was still a horrific act.
But in terms of the public shock factor, it didn't make too many waves.
People who had been around Herod had seen him do far worse things.
This was in an out-of-the-way place, and it was in a time when newspapers weren't even a thing.
So as far as Jerusalem was concerned, they might have heard some rumors that something bad had happened out there in Bethlehem, but they didn't know much about it.
Herod's killing the innocents.
It is not the stuff of a Hallmark Christmas movie.
It's not a chapter that we like to spend much time on during a holiday season that's all about love and lights and presents and all that, but yet it graphically demonstrates why Jesus came.
Jesus didn't come into our world because it was such a lovely place filled with lovely people.
He came to our world because it's a very broken place filled with a lot of darkness.
The challenge of each human heart because Jesus has come to ask ourselves, well, who is my king?
See, Herod didn't like the idea that there was another king that might be challenging his throne.
I think Herod was a grotesque caricature, but he depicts
This conflict of allegiance that I think is common to all of us.
Maybe it's a conflict that we as Americans are especially attuned to.
We celebrate the 4th of July every year, which is all about throwing off a king.
We're Americans.
We don't like kings.
It's not that we're totally against the concept.
We just prefer kingship on a more personal basis.
A man's home is his castle, right?
We prefer to be our own kings.
Apple has demonstrated its marketing genius by catering to that spirit of individualism.
You probably have your iPhone or maybe you get your iPad or you get your iMac or you get your iTunes.
It's all about i, i, i.
And we will spend billions of dollars
for the benefit of I. Burger King, right, for years, has passed out crowns to assure us that their establishment, you can have it your way.
When you come in here, you are the king of hamburgers, and we love that idea.
I was reading an article recently about artificial intelligence, and it noted that ChatGPT is part of a major release in their model
had gone to great lengths to make it respond to users more warmly.
So when I ask the computer a question, even if it is, and I know it is, just a bunch of emotionless circuits compiling data, I still want to be addressed with courtesy and respect and warmth.
Maybe even the occasional yes, your majesty.
For many years, you probably know, Campus Crusade for Christ.
Now, crew distributed a little booklet called The Four Spiritual Laws.
And in one section, they used a drawing of a simple throne, the kind of throne that I can draw.
And they suggested that each person begins life seated on that throne.
I get that.
I like to be the guy in charge.
And then they set around that, they put a circle around it, and that represented the domain of a person's life, the things that I rule over.
And within that domain of my life are all the things that I choose to fill my personal kingdom with.
Some of those things are good, things like career, friends, hobbies,
Lots of good things go in my domain, but then there's also some of them that aren't.
It may be an addiction, lust, greed, anger.
There are things that give a certain level of pleasure, and yet they also demand a price.
Not only do we fill our kingdom circles with things that we like, we also fight pretty hard to keep out things that might threaten our control.
Now, I don't think any of us would do it to the same cruel extent as a hered.
But often our self-protective motivations are just the same.
We don't like things, we don't like people that in any way threaten our control.
Sometimes the cruelties of our actions are limited more by our lack of power or our fear of consequences than it is our lack of will.
In our heart of hearts sometimes, we have the same kinds of murderous, paranoid thoughts about people that we think might threaten our control.
Hera just had the ability to carry them out in pretty gross ways.
But then, along comes Jesus.
Someone tells us about him.
We hear his God's son.
We look at the evidence and we come to believe that he really is who he claimed to be.
We hear that he loves us, that he came to rescue us.
We hear that he can forgive us, that he can free us from things in our kingdom that pollute our lives, the things that sometimes take us hostage.
And it is a beautiful story.
It's a true story.
It's one of the stories we love to tell our mind ourselves of at Christmas, this beautiful free gift of love.
And yet there's a catch.
You know what the catch is, right?
If we want to let Jesus do those things in our life, we have to be willing to let Him sit on the throne.
And that's where the conflict comes.
Because like Herod, that news often is troubling.
I had a friend recently who in a moment of vulnerability and honesty said to me, I don't like submitting to anyone.
Even God.
Around Christmas time, maybe you know about the advertising campaign that occurred in Britain years ago.
It was a group of wealthy atheists led by Richard Dawkins.
They plastered these signs all over buses in London.
There's probably no God.
Now stop worrying and enjoy your life.
The message was clear, right?
The key to your happiness is doing away with God and taking control of your own throne.
I think that kind of fear comes from at least two sources.
First, there's this desire.
I've already talked about our herald-like desire to keep the throne for ourselves.
And second, there's this fear that if I let God have the throne, it's going to mean submitting myself to a tyrant that maybe is even more onerous than Herod.
The implication here is, if there is a God,
He may ask things of me.
He may do things to me.
He may rule over me in such a way that I will no longer be able to enjoy my life.
As to the first fear, the fear of losing or throwing a control, maybe the place to start is asking if I really am as good of a king as I would like other people to believe I am.
How often in my life has doing what felt right in the moment ended up being all wrong?
How much do I really know about the future?
All these decisions I make in the moment that I think will give me a good future, how much do I really know about the future?
And how limited am I in trying to address the mistakes of my past?
The times I've made the bad decision, the times that life has gone upside down and I had a controlling role in what went wrong, how much power do I really have to undo the past?
And when I really think about it, does the thought that everything might depend on me, does that really bring me peace or does that bring me anxiety?
As to that second fear that letting God have the throne will leave me
in a worse place than Herod's subjects, I think the Christmas story shatters all the expectations of how kings behave.
See, maybe in Britain this makes sense.
If you live under a monarchy and if you've known a cruel monarchy, you've lived in the time of Herod, you've known a cruel Herod, the thought that God wants to be king, someone who is all-powerful might be a frightening thought because, man, kings can really be wicked.
Herod's kingship, like most kings, was a rule from the top down.
And Jesus could certainly have manifested himself in that way if he chose to.
Had God's Son so desired, he could have made a blazing appearance right in the very throne room of Herod himself and forced Herod to his knees there by a simple display of his glory.
And yet that's not how he chose to come.
While Herod was sitting on a throne,
Jesus was lying as a helpless babe in a manger.
In fact, so quietly did he appear that foreign dignitaries following heavenly signs still had to stop and ask directions as to where to find him.
Herod's approach to people he feared would betray him was the sword.
Tell me where the baby is.
I'll take care of that.
They have to die
so that he could live.
Contrast that with Jesus' response on the night that he was betrayed by Judas and Peter pulled out his sword.
And Jesus said, put your sword away.
Jesus came to die so that people like us could live.
The very people who had usurped the thrones of our lives.
John 3.17, God did not send his son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him.
Herod relied on fear for his control.
As Augustus said, better to be Herod's pig than his son.
Jesus used love to lead.
John 10.10,
The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy.
I came that they may have life and have it abundantly.
I am the good shepherd.
The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep."
See, rather than kicking in the door in an assault, the Bible says that Jesus stands at the door of our heart and knocks, and he asks to come in.
For Herod holding his power as a puppet king under the control of Rome,
mattered more to him than the lives of innocent children.
For Jesus, saving the lives of guilty people mattered more than holding on to his place of authority over all creation.
Philippians 2.
Though he was God, he did not think of equality with God as something to cling to.
Instead, he gave up his divine privileges.
He took the humble position of a slave and was born as a human being.
When he appeared in human form, he humbled himself in obedience to God and died a criminal's death on a cross.
When Jesus is given the throne, there will be changes in the kingdom of my life.
But they are good changes.
They're changes for my good.
There are changes for the good of those around me.
Jesus is a completely different kind of king.
Not the kind of king like a herod, but a king who willing gives himself for the good of those he loves.
And I would just say that if you've never surrendered your life to God, there could be no better gift this Christmas than to accept that gift of his son, Jesus.
Now, for those of us who are followers of Jesus,
I want to speak for a moment to the tendency that some of us, maybe all of us have, to attempt to take the throne back.
Trying to make God a co-regent instead of sole director.
I've known some very religious people who wear their spirituality on their sleeve and on their bumper stickers and on their wall art.
And yet when it came to the day-to-day stuff of life,
it didn't really seem to make a difference.
I remember a client years ago, when I was running my medical business, we were liquidating the office for this doctor, and he was very upfront about his Christian faith.
He had wall art all over the office, and loved to talk about his faith, and that was a big deal, which is great.
He's a really nice guy.
We had an agreement, our contract, for how we were supposed to handle the liquidation,
We had a lot of supplies in the office, we were trying to sell on site form, so I invited a client, who's a good friend of mine, also a Christian, I invited their office to come over and take a look.
I had to be gone for an hour or so, so I told the doctor, I said, I'll be back, anything they want, just wait until I get back, I'll take care of the transaction, because obviously I got paid a percentage and everything we sold.
Later that afternoon, my friend called me from the other clinic and said, hey, I just thought you should know,
We saw a lot of stuff we want, and we're going to get it from you, but you might want to watch that client.
He told us that we could probably just do the deal directly, and we didn't need to bring you into it.
Well, OK.
I guess that Christian Waller maybe didn't mean all that I thought that it did.
Several years ago, I was watching a documentary on Ramsay's 2.
He lived about 1,200 years before Herod.
And one of his lasting monuments is the temple of Abu Simbel carved from rock.
And on the exterior, you can see are these four giant images.
These are images of the Pharaoh himself.
Each one of them is 60 feet tall.
So these are big, right?
Why four of them?
Well, that was way of emphasizing his importance, his grandeur.
one statue of him is not enough for statues it takes to really tell you just how great he really is.
Now around his feet are these tiny statues, those represent the royal family.
So they do get some recognition, just not nearly as much.
What I wanna draw your attention to though, is this little small statue that is up behind him right there, see that?
That is, I got this wrong, Raharakti, I think it is.
He is the Sun God raw fused with the Falcon headed God Horus So he's got this little God Embedded up there right behind him now.
Here's what the message is the message is my family is important My God is even more important he's above right But I am the most important for big means
I definitely want God on my side, right behind me, kind of like the little kings scurrying around behind the Queen of Hearts skirts.
If I have an errand for you, I'll let you know.
You know, think about Herod.
Did you know that Herod was very religious?
Very religious guy.
Maybe you recall Jesus visiting the temple in Jerusalem.
This comes from Mark 13.1.
As Jesus came out of the temple,
One of the disciples said to him, look, teacher, what wonderful stones and what wonderful buildings.
It was an amazing structure.
Massive or innate, the walls were covered in gold plating and marble.
It was the largest religious site in the ancient world.
Some of the stones in that temple weighed 40 tons.
One wall, the western wall, sometimes called the whaling wall, is still standing today.
Do you know what the common name was for that temple?
It was called Herod's Temple.
Herod the Great built it.
It took him 46 years to complete.
He started it 20 years before Christ was born.
And so here's the irony.
At the same time Herod was building a magnificent temple to God in Jerusalem, he was attempting to murder God's son in Bethlehem.
The temple was sort of about God.
It was really about Herod.
He didn't mind paying lip service, even spending big dollars in honor of the God who had promised to send the Messiah.
What he objected to was the threat of Messiah actually showing up and displacing his power.
Of course, you know in Jesus' ministry, the biggest source of opposition he faced was from the religious leaders.
We find this right after he raised Lazarus from the dead.
The chief priests and the Pharisees gathered the council and said, what are we to do?
If this man performs many more signs,
If we let him go on like this, everyone will believe in him.
And the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation.
They're not worried about who Jesus really is.
The signs are supposed to tell, that's not worries.
And what they're worried is, they're going to lose their position.
Religion is fine as long as it fits their agenda, but Jesus isn't fitting their agenda.
So here's my question.
Are you willing to let Jesus out of the manger
and let him sit on the throne.
In that throne illustration, I think there are people who would say that they have let Jesus in.
He has become part of their inner circle.
He's very welcome there.
Like Ramses, they would like to keep him near the throne, but more over their shoulder than giving up their control.
Like that silly queen of hearts, we acknowledge there's a king, but we would prefer if you stay out of sight until summoned.
So who is your king?
Is there some aspect of life right now where you're unwilling to let Jesus be king?
Maybe there's someone in your family or a neighbor or a co-worker who has offended you, and you know that Jesus would ask you to forgive, but you really don't want to let it go.
Holding that grudge.
punishing that person with your words or your gossip or ignoring them.
It gives you a kind of power over them.
And you know that Jesus used his power to go to a cross so that you could be forgiven, but you're not willing to release your power of bitterness.
Who is your king?
Maybe it's your finances.
Maybe that's your security, your power.
And you sense that maybe Jesus is asking you to become a more generous person.
Or to step away from this all-consuming drive to accumulate more and more or hold on to what you have, whatever the cost.
Or maybe it's those credit cards.
Maybe you sense the Lord nudging your heart and saying, you should really give those up.
Stop letting them fuel that desire for more than you can afford.
Or that desire to convey images of success that is false.
There's probably no season more tempting than Christmas to let materialism sit on the throne of our lives.
How ironic, isn't it?
The season that we celebrate God giving all to come is the very season we spend money we don't have to buy junk we don't need to impress people we often don't even like.
So who is your king?
Maybe it's your family.
You'd say, man, there's nothing more important than family, holding on to my family.
But maybe you sense Jesus is asking you to release the grip.
Stop trying to control them.
Stop trying to protect them and hold on to them and love them, yes, guide them as best you can and yet release them to Jesus.
Even if it means that he may allow trials in their lives.
Are you willing to let him be their king?
Maybe it's your time.
Maybe that's the thing you value most.
And time is precious to be sure.
Our days are numbered.
And like money, how we invest it has a lot to say about who really is king in our lives.
Is our time being consumed with a constant striving to acquire more?
Or is our free time consumed with simply seeking pleasure?
entertainment, hobbies, travel, none of those things are wrong in themselves.
But does our time reflect attention and priority to the things that Jesus cares about?
When you hear of a need of a friend or a ministry need in the church or a service need in the community, how do you respond?
Do you pause and ask God if perhaps he's calling you to meet that need?
Or is your default response, I don't have time?
I'm sure somebody else will take care of that.
Who is your king?
Maybe it's something else entirely.
But you know that there is this inner struggle going on over who is going to sit on the throne.
Could I just say let Jesus have it?
He's a better king than you are.
He has a better plan than you've come up with.
Take a cue from those wise men and bow and worship the king.
Let's pray.
Lord Jesus, thank you that you are a far better king.
You came into this world in a most unexpected way for royalty.
With humility, with love, with sacrifice,
Father, forgive us for the ways that we try to grab the throne back for ourselves.
The foolish ways that we think that we would be a better king.
Lord, I pray that you would grant us the humility to step off the throne and to let you be the king.
That you would be glorified in our lives that others would be blessed
because we're letting the right king sit in his rightful place.
We pray these things in his powerful name, amen.